Key:        LU-17973
Summary:    FLR2: improve read mirror selection for many copies
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-17973
Type:       Technical task
Priority:   Minor
Status:     Open
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   Andreas Dilger
Reporter:   Andreas Dilger
Created:    Mon, 24 Jun 2024 22:15:03 +0000
Updated:    Fri, 2 Oct 2026 18:11:31 +0000
Labels:     medium
Links:      Related: is related to  LU-12669; Related: is related to  LU-10499; Related: is related to  LU-10158

--- Description ---
When selecting a file with a mirrored layout to read from, the client will examine all of the mirrors:

	any mirror component marked LCME_FL_STALE should be skipped

	any mirror component marked LCME_FL_PREF_RD should be selected first (LU-10282)

	any mirror component on OSTs marked OS_STATE_NONROT should be preferred over mirrors without this flag (SSD vs. HDD, LU-14996)

If there are multiple mirrors matching all of these criteria, then it is likely that the mirrors were created for performance or availability reasons, rather than tiered OST storage (which would likely be excluded by OS_STATE_NONROT and/or LCME_FL_PREF_RD).

In this case, it is desirable to maximize usage of page cache on the OSS nodes. For small files (e.g. For larger files, it is desirable to spread the read workload across multiple OSS nodes to better utilize the OSS RAM and network bandwidth. Clients should deterministically round-robin reads for large files across replicas (e.g. every 1GiB). If there are a large number of equivalent replicas of a file (eg. more than 2 or 3?), clients should deterministically evenly distribute their selection of the mirror by e.g. (client NID + offset in GiB) modulo mirror count (e.g. see patch https://review.whamcloud.com/29136 implementation of lmv_select_statfs_mdt() for how clients distribute MDT_STATFS RPCs across MDS nodes).

--- Comment (adilger, Thu, 16 Apr 2026 19:19:12 +0000) ---
mjaguil this is the ticket I was referencing on the LWG call about improving the client mirror selection policy, so that if a large number of clients are reading the same file they will distribute their reads effectively across all of the OSTs.  The goal is to maximize both the aggregate OSS cache (i.e. read data into OSS cache and re-use it as much as possible without thrashing the cache) as well as the aggregate OSS network bandwidth (i.e. distribute reads across multiple OSS nodes) in a decentralized manner (i.e. clients do this autonomously without any centralized control or direction) based on the file layout.

If it is known in advance that some file will be highly oversubscribed (e.g. application binaries/libraries, job input files, common datasets) then the job scheduler could potentially make many mirrors of a file while it is in the queue so that it is ready for job launch.  This helps the case where many different clients are reading the same file by increasing the aggregate read bandwidth of a single file.

In the case where clients are repeatedly accessing the same file (whether from many clients or not), then the PCC-RO feature is better suited to transparently caching the file into client-local storage and not having to re-read the data from the server again until the file is modified (or it is removed from the client cache if it is too old).

On the server side, it is already possible to use the OFD Access Log (OAL, lustre/utils/ofd_access_log_reader.c is an example) to monitor IO access patterns in userspace to determine "hot" files, and then use "lfs mirror extend" (available today) or "lfs pcc attach" (when it is finished) to add copies to those files to improve aggregate bandwidth.
