Key:        LU-17957
Summary:    set immutable with "future atime + chmod a-w"
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-17957
Type:       Improvement
Priority:   Major
Status:     In Progress
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   Chakshu Kansal
Reporter:   Andreas Dilger
Created:    Mon, 17 Jun 2024 23:18:55 +0000
Updated:    Thu, 9 Jul 2026 18:31:47 +0000
Labels:     medium
Links:      Related: is related to  LU-18679; Related: is related to LU-14915; Related: is related to LU-19252

--- Description ---
Implement a POSIX interface to allow non-root users to set a file immutable, in a similar manner to GPFS:

	set the file access time into the future: "touch -ac --date='1 hour' "

	remove all write permission to the file: "chmod a-w "

	internally this will result in the "FS_IMMUTABLE_FL" to be set on the file if the user is the file owner or has the CAP_SYS_IMMUTABLE capability

Implement a POSIX interface to allow non-root users to set a file append-only, in a similar manner to GPFS:

	set the file access time into the future: "touch -ac --date='1 hour' "

	remove all write permission to the file then add them back on a file with size = 0: "chmod a-w ; chmod u+w "

	internally this will result in the "FS_APPEND_FL" to be set on the file if the user is the file owner or has the CAP_SYS_IMMUTABLE capability

There should be some minimum future atime needed (e.g. 60s?) so that small atime variance among clients/servers does not inadvertently trigger the IMMUTABLE/APPEND functionality.

The immutable/append-only flag itself should prevent any modification of the existing file contents, regardless of how the flag was set.

For files with a project ID that has the "PROJECT_FLAG_COMPLIANCE" attribute set (LU-14915), files with atime in the future should prevent the FS_IMMUTABLE_FL and FS_APPEND_FL attribute from being removed from the file, even by the root user or process with CAP_SYS_IMMUTABLE.  The atime of such files can be increased but never decreased.  Once the atime has passed, files with project ID with PROJECT_FLAG_COMPLIANCE can be deleted, but not modified or have the FS_IMMUTABLE_FL or FS_APPEND_FL removed.  

Tests for this feature should not set the atime too far into the future (e.g. not more than a minute or two), so that the test does not need to wait very long until the atime is in the past.  However, in production we may want a minimum threshold for "the future" to avoid issues with clock skew accidentally triggering this functionality.

--- Comment (adilger, Mon, 17 Jun 2024 23:22:49 +0000) ---
There are a number of places where this functionality could be implemented:

	client - has the drawback that the client is the most easily modified.

	MDS - needs to also set the FS_IMMUTABLE_FL flag on the OST objects. We would need to trust the MDS clock in this case (e.g. NTP).

	ldiskfs - needs a patch to ldiskfs, but has the benefit (drawback?) that it would also prevent direct removal of the FS_IMMUTABLE_FL from the underlying inode.

None of these approaches can entirely prevent the removal/modification of an immutable file by themselves, because a sophisticated attacker can still patch the kernel to bypass these added checks. However, if the functionality is implemented on the MDS and/or ldiskfs, this would at least require a sophisticated attack with a root compromise of the server, which is considerably more difficult than mounting the filesystem with a modified client.

It would be nice if it were possible for regular users to use "touch -ac --date=FUTURE_DATE FILE; chattr +i FILE" (and ideally also "chattr +i FILE; touch -ac --date=FUTURE_DATE FILE") for files (i.e. it shouldn't matter how the FS_IMMUTABLE_FL is set initially, and it should be possible to advance the "keep until" date for an existing file).

--- Comment (JIRAUSER21301, Wed, 8 Jul 2026 15:40:49 +0000) ---
adilger Let me ask about hijacking atime.  Keep in mind that I am distinguishing the notion of interface from the underpinning implementation.  So the proposed interface is by "diddling atime".  That's fine, I have no objections to that interface.  But does it necessarily need to be implemented as a permanent hijack of atime inode attribute?  Semantically you are proposing to repurpose atime to represent "retention period".  My question is:  why not add an honest-to-goodness retention period attribute to the inode?  It's fine to manipulate retention period by "diddling atime" at the user interface level, but IMHO it might be valuable to retain atime for its original purpose in case there are applications that rely on its true meaning (i.e. last time when file was accessed).  Yes I realize that many customers mount with "noatime" which renders atime attribute useless ... but there are probably still a few who do want atime updates.

--- Comment (adilger, Thu, 9 Jul 2026 18:31:47 +0000) ---
voratovsky, this interface is not something that I invented, but rather something that is already in use by the financial industry for IBM Storage Scale, Netapp and other storage systems (you can follow this on the internal EX/DDN ticket linked to this one that I no longer have access to).  I don't think this is "permanently hijacking" the atime, but only the "future atime" that should not normally be used, and only contingent upon removing all write permissions on the file.  This seems an uncommon-enough combination that it shouldn't happen accidentally in the field.

As for repurposing the atime for "retention period", I think the main reason anyone is interested in atime is whether the file has recently been used, or if it could be purged.  In that respect, if the file is immutable until the retention period expires, then it cannot be purged until that time either, so that usage is rendered obsolete.

Note that the OST objects themselves also track atime locally, and that should not be affected by the "set atime in the future" step, so it would be possible for tools like lpurge that scan the OST objects to determine whether the flash copy of a file is recently used or not, and migrate the file to cold storage (while still preventing it from being deleted.

Storing a separate "retention period" attribute has some appeal, but also has a cost as well.  The space for extra attributes in the inode is always constrained, so re-using the atime has some appeal for this (and IBM did it already).  If we can find some existing space to re-use without bloating the inode/xattrs that would definitely be something to consider.
