Key:        LU-11571
Summary:    DNE3: MDT pool
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-11571
Type:       Improvement
Priority:   Major
Status:     Open
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   Peter Jones
Reporter:   CEA
Created:    Thu, 25 Oct 2018 07:33:00 +0000
Updated:    Tue, 18 Aug 2026 22:46:15 +0000
Links:      Related: is related to  LU-18222; Related: is related to  LU-11023; Related: is related to LU-18222; Related: is related to LU-15494; Related: is related to LU-8616; Related: is related to LU-18015; Related: is related to LU-13612; Related: is related to LU-17516

--- Description ---
I brought the question up at JLUG2018, and cannot find any ticket for this; somewhere to discuss (and for others to show interest) might be good. Please mark as duplicate if I missed another one.

 

Basically, the way we're using DNE v1 right now is mostly to isolate populations: users we have little control over get their own MDT where if they cause problems only impact themselves, and the rest gets MDT0/other MDTs with hardcoded repartition.

 

With DoM we'll want to add more MDTs, yet still isolate populations. It would be good if we could shard/round-robin directory creations on a set of MDTs definted per directory.

 

One open question was "shall this be the same as the OST pool, or another one"?

For our use case, just adding the MDTs to the pool would work (we also separate populations per pool)

In the worst case if someone needs something independent they'd need to create a cross product of mdt/ost pools, which isn't great but could kind of work at small scale... I can't think of much usage to have these separately though. (I actually need to look at how PFL and pools interact, been out of touch; if we can have multiple pools set this way having a separate one for MDTs could just work?)

A simple rule of "no MDT set in the pool = any MDT" and similar for OST would probably be sound enough...

 

Any other open questions?

I'm not going to offer to look at the code for this yet, given how slow I am with the file create lock LU... Maybe once I'm done here and can free more time 

 

Thanks!

--- Comment (pjones, Thu, 25 Oct 2018 07:49:55 +0000) ---
Thanks martinetd. Having a Jira ticket to collect input from interested parties is definitely an important precursor to any detailed design work/development.

--- Comment (adilger, Sun, 13 Jun 2021 08:58:24 +0000) ---
sergey, are there any plans at HPE to implement MDT pools for 2.15, now that the OST pool quotas work is landed?

--- Comment (adilger, Tue, 24 Jan 2023 19:58:57 +0000) ---
Just a quick notes here for whomever works on this in the future.

There is already some basic infrastructure for MDT pools in the code (in particular, struct lmv_user_md has a "lum_pool_name" field already), but it is unused.  Some other code like lod_pool_qos_penalties_calc() would need to be updated to include available inodes in the weighting for MDT pools.

--- Comment (adilger, Wed, 16 Aug 2023 00:49:07 +0000) ---
There is increasing demand for > 40 MDTs in a single filesystem, and implementing MDT pools will improve manageability and reliability.  This will at least partially segregate the namespace to separate/smaller MDT pools, rather than distributing every directory potentially across every MDT in the filesystem.  This will minimize the interaction between MDTs during recovery, so that there is less chance of something going wrong when there are M2 MDT recoveries happening simultaneously.  Instead there would be P * (M/P)2 = M2/P recoveries at startup.

Also, if there is a catastrophic MDT failure, then this would isolate the "blast radius" to a subdirectory tree of the filesystem using that pool, rather than affect 1/M of every directory and file in the filesystem.

--- Comment (sergey, Mon, 10 Aug 2026 22:51:26 +0000) ---
Hi adilger ,

https://review.whamcloud.com/c/fs/lustre-release/+/67642/ touch the things that should be used for MDT Pools. If MDT pools were implemented, are we going to have MDT pool quotas only for metadata?

I believe it is reasonable to support the both quota resource types: data and metadata. Now it returns -ENOTSUP if try to set inode limits to OST Pool Quotas. However, in case of MDT Pools, we could support the both resource for DOM and inodes quotas.

Assuming MDT pool quotas were to support data and metadata quota limits, is it reasonable to consider implementing inode quotas for OSTs and OST pool quotas? If MDT pools had data and metadata quotas, we could easily apply the same logic to OSTs and their pool quotas. It’s clear that OST data capacity is being utilised much faster than inode counts, and this isn’t currently a problem. However, what if in the future we will have combined OST + MDT targets or OST object will occupy more than 1 inode because of large xattrs? Even now I guess overstripe may be a use case.

--- Comment (adilger, Tue, 11 Aug 2026 14:47:13 +0000) ---
Sergey, on the one hand it would be reasonable to implement inode quotas for OSTs, there are several potential issues with this:

	files with PFL layouts consume multiple OST objects per user-visible file, which would be confusing for administrators and users when "find" in the filesystem does not match the reported quota inode usage. We get regular complaints about "du" not matching quota block usage (for whatever reason).

	the OST objects are not directly visible to users, and a default PFL filesystem layout may not be controlled by the user. This gets "worse" for SEL files, which may create multiple sets of objects for the file based on the size

	Would this add overhead on the OSTs beyond the block quota accounting?

If this can be implemented easily, and disabled easily (eg. not enable inode quota accounting on OSTs at format time) then I'm not against it, but I don't think this is a high priority functionality for users.

--- Comment (sergey, Wed, 12 Aug 2026 18:05:41 +0000) ---
adilger ,

Would this add overhead on the OSTs beyond the block quota accounting?

The overhead should be the same with what we already have for MDT inode quotas.

f this can be implemented easily, and disabled easily (eg. not enable inode quota accounting on OSTs at format time) then I'm not against it, but I don't think this is a high priority functionality for users. 

Yes, this should be easy to enable and disable. Btw, one of use cases with almost zero overhead overhead is to enable inodes quotas accounting for the OSTs but don't set any limits. That said, we could see how many inodes are consumed by any quota ID.

adilger,

Are we going to support inodes quotas together with the space quotas(DOM) for MDT pools?

If the answer is yes, as a bonus we would have inodes quotas for the OSTs and OST PQs. At first look, no extra work is required. From the QMT point of view there would be still 2 quota resource types: data and metadata. And each resource type would support 2 arrays for MDTs and OSTs. If Keguang agreed with my proposal in https://review.whamcloud.com/c/fs/lustre-release/+/67642, it would be a good base for MDT pool quotas and OST inodes quotas in the future.

--- Comment (adilger, Tue, 18 Aug 2026 22:46:15 +0000) ---
MDTs will need to support both inode and space quotas, for DoM as well as MDT pools.  If OSTs can have inode accounting that would be interesting, but by default I don't think object quota limit enforcement will do what anyone really wants.
