Key:        LU-20307
Summary:    enhanced project ID functionality
Link:       https://jira.whamcloud.com/browse/LU-20307
Type:       Improvement
Priority:   Medium
Status:     Open
Resolution: Unresolved
Assignee:   WC Triage
Reporter:   Andreas Dilger
Created:    Tue, 26 May 2026 17:58:50 +0000
Updated:    Tue, 26 May 2026 19:14:11 +0000
Labels:     medium
Links:      Related: is related to  LU-14915; Related: is related to  LU-14968; Related: is related to  LU-19507; Related: is related to  LU-13335; Related: is related to LU-14915

--- Description ---
Extracted from LU-13335, since that ticket was closed without implementing the enhanced project features.

There is also a more extensive /etc/project format defined by Solaris, that is apparently also handled by /etc/nsswitch.conf, so we should maintain compatibility with that for extensions beyond the basic projname:projid fields, essentially just ignoring any extra fields for now:

projname:projid:comment:user-list:group-list:attributes

The fields are defined as follows:

	projname - The name of the project. The name must be a string that consists of alphanumeric characters, underline (_) characters, hyphens (-), and periods (.). The period, which is reserved for projects with special meaning to the operating system, can only be used in the names of default projects for users. projname cannot contain colons (:) or newline characters. Implemented in LU-13335.

	projid - The project's unique numerical ID (PROJID) within the system. The maximum value of the projid field is UID_MAX (2147483647). Implemented in LU-13335.

	comment - A description of the project. Partly implemented in LU-13335 (any fields after projname:projid in the file are ignored).

	user-list - A comma-separated list of users who are allowed in the project. Wildcards can be used in this field. An asterisk (*) allows all users to join the project. An exclamation point followed by an asterisk (!*) excludes all users from the project. An exclamation mark (!) followed by a user name excludes the specified user from the project.

	group-list - A comma-separated list of groups of users who are allowed in the project. Wildcards can be used in this field. An asterisk (*) allows all groups to join the project. An exclamation point followed by an asterisk (!*) excludes all groups from the project. An exclamation mark (!) followed by a group name excludes the specified group from the project.

	attributes - A semicolon-separated list of name-value pairs, such as resource controls (see Chapter 6, Resource Controls (Overview)). name is an arbitrary string that specifies the object-related attribute, and value is the optional value for that attribute.

    name[=value]

In the name-value pair, names are restricted to letters, digits, underscores, and periods. A period is conventionally used as a separator between the categories and subcategories of the resource control (rctl). The first character of an attribute name must be a letter. The name is case sensitive.

Values can be structured by using commas and parentheses to establish precedence.

A semicolon is used to separate name-value pairs. A semicolon cannot be used in a value definition. A colon is used to separate project fields. A colon cannot be used in a value definition.
